## My values

### Local, regional, national, then global
- A.k.a. apply your own oxygen mask before you help those around you.
- You understand your home better than you understand someone elses. You know where things are and how they work. You can use that understanding to effect more change.
- The universe is fractal. The closer you look at something, the more sub-dimensions you find the thing contains. 
- Come more into contact with your community, understand its problems, understand its people. Solve their problems first.
- Like the cells of our bodies, we want our local communities to maintain independent functioning, while still participating in ever larger contextual rings of interdependence. 
- Share ideas and raw resources globally, produce goods and services locally. 

### Technology is a tool, not God
- Modern technology promises more and more power and even immortality. It has replaced for many of us, the role that [religion once played](https://stevesammartino.com/2021/11/05/technology-as-a-religion/) in the past.
- Tech should be used to achieve things in the real world. Get offline as fast as possible.
- We should take a lesson from the Amish and deeply consider the consequences of each new piece of tech we introduce.
- Like any tool, we should understand deeply how our tech works, and make sure that we can always make do without it. 

### Accuracy over efficiency
- Think of an archer shooting an array at a moving target. 
- Accuracy demands efficiency, as drawing another arrow wastes more time than preparing the shot, or perhaps picking another target altogether. 
- Accuracy demands practice. A good archer would train relentlessly 
- Accuracy demands self-knowledge. You must know where you stand and what the surrounding conditions are like.
- Accuracy demands minimalism. To gain a vantage over the target, the archer must be nimble.
- Accuracy has an end-state - once the target is hit, the archer can retreat, regroup and find another target.
- Rather than an efficient economy, we want an accurate economy, where our goals are based on human-centric design. We figure out what we *need*, aim for that, achieve it and then pause to reconsider our next goal. Rather than just working more efficiently for growth's sake - put the purpose of our work in the spotlight.

### Apathy and aggression are corrosive. 
- Aggression is displayed when an individual advances their own goals at the expense of another - through lying, fraud, manipulation or physical violence. The spectrum of violence starts with seeing others as opponents. 
- Apathy leads to laziness, willful ignorance and the inability to resist evil. 
- Both are highly corrosive to a complex, cooperative society.

### Authenticity and transparency
- Honesty is a blunt tool. It often fails to consider timing and can easily become aggressive. Sprich, sometimes no one cares about your opinion.
- Instead, listen to and sharpen your "gut" instinct, the system 1 thinking, das Bauchgefühl. This is authenticity. Train it in your interactions with others, within your profession, understand what it has to say about your health and wellbeing. 
- You can only train it by letting it make mistakes. Do as you feel is right, and stand up to any consequences when things go wrong.
- Understand it's limits, and communicate to others what is happening whenever they express the need to understand what you're doing. 
- Trust that you are a good human being, like most others, and that if you do what you really want, you'll also achieve a lot of good for the world. 