---
title: The Point of Learning
date: 2022-08-19
---
This week I got to enjoy that delightful feeling of having (almost...) filled out a blank notebook with things I've been reading and studying the last few months. While I'm normally not too sentimental about my notes (I haven't kept any of the dozens of such notebooks I've filled out over the years), I decided this week to have a little flick through them and see just what I was up to.

Projective geometry, group theory, a big dive into linear algebra, a bit of music theory and philosophy, as well as build systems and Haskell. What struck me at first was the detail of a lot of my notetaking. I've written down countless theorems and concepts with fanciful names (harmonic quadrangle theorem, Playfair's axiom, the four fundamental subspaces Hessenberg matrices) and I can quite clearly remember the fervour with which I wrote down some of these definitions. The funny thing is though, in the best case I might be able to tell somebody else a vague outline of what any of these things mean. In some cases, I might remember how a theorem or idea relates to its broader context. But most of the time, I would have to shrug and say "I can't remember."

My learning strategy this last year has been quite different from any other time in my life and quite contrarian towards most of the self-improvement advice one finds on learning effectively. This strategy is by no means new. In fact, most of the best mathematicians, scientists and philosophers who have ever existed seem to do it naturally, as well as the people in my more immediate circles who I admire the most. I've taken a while to get here.

Inspired by Daoism, I decided to apply a philosophy of minimal control to my self-education; instead trying to have as much fun as possible while learning. As soon as I realise that I'm not enjoying the next little morsel of information in front of me, then I stop and do something else. If I'm not enjoying a book, I stop reading it. If I've lost interest in a lecture series, I move onto another. Don't feel like doing a problem set? Skip ahead. Essentially, I'm trying to never interrupt the flow of learning by forcing myself to do something I know deep down I'm just not interested in.

In the past I would spend hours creating learning plans and scheduling my weeks to learn as "efficiently" as possible, only then to have to painfully force myself to follow through. I'd read books and articles about learning how to learn and stress over whether what I'm learning right now is the most effective use of my time, sometimes even [thrashing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thrashing_(computer_science)) between tasks in frustration. Now whenever I find a spare moment and have the intrinsic motivation to learn something, I bust open Wikipedia and let myself go down the rabbit hole. There is only one thing to learn and that is the thing I want to learn right now. 

Many mornings this summer I spent the first 5 or 6 hours of the day in a state of psychadelic glee getting into the nitty gritty of floating-point arithmetic or learning about number theory. The biggest benefit though - and this has to be the only thing that really matters: it's just been more fun. I think that's exactly why I've spent more time at it than ever before. I don't feel in my own way and instead of having to force myself, it feels effortless. 

But is there a cost? My biggest concern was that I can't control whatever it is I feel like learning. I was worried that I might just spread my energy too thin and not make any meaningful progress at any one area. However, I've noticed something very profound with a few months' hindsight: the things I pick out seem to be converging on something. My subconcious serves up new ideas that all tend in a similar direction. Whenever I drop one thing, I'm beginning to build up the confidence that I'll cross paths with that concept again if I need it at some point in the future. 

Our external world is constantly making demands on our time and attention, requiring that we adapt and learn certain things at certain times. If we feel those demands are legitimate, we internalise them and find a real joy in adapting and discovering more about who we are in the process. What's tougher are the demands on us that just don't *feel* right: exams for subjects and tasks at work we just can't bring ourselves to care for; too many notifications from our phones. 

The real cost in this strategy of maximum play then is finding the courage to stay on this path of least resistence. To say no to the uninteresting demands on our time from above; to be disciplined about the drags on our time from below. To give up the identity we build up around the things we have learnt as our intuition directs us onto something new. To have the humility to always put ourselves in the learner's shoes and to pay the price for not signalling to others just how much you know.

Of course, if learning how to learn is fun, then that's what one should do, and I do think there is a place for making schedules and introducing a bit of rigour and discipline into learning. Sometimes, we just don't have the freedom to learn whatever we want to, for exactly as much time as we would like, or we need to start coordinating with many other people. In those cases, a pinch of structure can help us focus and interact with the other systems around us. 

Yet, I do believe that we are too entrenched in our ways of doing things. Too many people are learning the same things because they believe it will make them rich or famous, or because mum, dad or Facebook told them too. Strict systems of accountability are introduced to get people through the content as fast as possible. Degrees are invented to show each other just how much we "know". So I encourage anyone who reads this to dare to find out what happens if you fail a course, get in trouble at work or don't reply immediately to your friends, just as long as you were doing the thing *you* wanted to instead. 

## Resources:
- Peter Grey, Unschooling