---
title: Think Negative
date: 2021-03-10
---

### What do I regret?

David Whyte recalls his realisation in [this podcast episode](https://samharris.org/podcasts/240-boundaries-self/) with Sam Harris at just how unfashionable the word __regret__ has become in modern life; that many people profess living lives without regret and that even though they surely do harbour memories they'd rather not have (or else, what sort of boring lives had they been living?), that it seems a sign of weakness or unhappiness with one's self to admit them to others. He goes on to suggest that admitting regret can be a means of growth; of acknowledging that there are things you wish you'd done differently so that you can be sure not to repeat these same mistakes in the future.

This line of reasoning sounds very familiar to two other concepts I've learnt recently that also fly in the face of what we're taught to believe in modernity - that only positive thinking is useful and that one must be on constant guard for negativity, lest it drag you down and dissipate your motivation to achieve your goals. The first concept is known as [mental contrasting](https://www.happinesslab.fm/season-1-episodes/dont-accentuate-the-positive), the other: [ironic processes](https://www.happinesslab.fm/season-1-episodes/dont-think-of-a-white-bear).

An ironic process describes that familiar challenge of trying not to think of a polar bear after I've just written the word polar bear. The more you try not to, the harder it gets. It turns out this concept goes way deeper, and certain things like anger or frustration, depression or even trauma will continue to occupy mental cycles - and ever more aggressively so - the more you try to push them out of your mind. Instead, the best solution is to acknowledge these feelings, write about them, talk about them, and try to understand the messages they carry.

Mental contrasting is based on some interesting research that shows that purely positive thinking seems to confuse your mind into believing that you've already (at least partially) done something to achieve the things you want to achieve, just by imagining how great it will be. When you then encounter real-world setbacks, you're left surprised and disappointed by the messiness of reality, and so your desire to continue in the face of adversity diminishes rapidly. When setting goals focusing on what might go wrong - particularly inward aspects of your own character - actually gives your mind permission to start running simulations and ahead of time think of solutions to the obstacles you might face along the way. I think mental contrasting deserves a whole 'nother discussion.

Firstly, I should perhaps address one issue with the title of this article, namely, that I've deliberately conflated negativity and pessimism - as we all often do - and yet I consider the distinction between them to be incredibly important.

Negativity is a valence, a quality that something might have in a particular direction away from a neutral center. Negativity is also arbitrary: we just decide that one direction goes up and the other goes down. But just like positivity, we need negativity, or else we can only ever talk about half of reality.

Pessimism is a state of mind, a very particular type of negativity - that of __being__ negative, and often what we think of when talking about negativity in relation to our mindsets or attitudes towards the world. Pessimism, while perhaps useful in some circumstances (I'll leave the reader to decide for themselves when that might be the case), tends to be toxic and only serves to demotivate and alienate you from others. There seems to be something fundamentally useful about [optimism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A*_search_algorithm) and I don't think it conflicts with the idea of negativity I'm trying to push here.

To drive home the point of what David Whyte and the researchers that discovered ironic processes or mental contrasting are saying, we can hold the negative aspects of our lives - the things that have gone in the direction opposite to that which we arbitrarily defined for ourselves - in our minds without succumbing to fear or anger, or perhaps even with warmth and respect for ourselves. In fact, it might be necessary to do so if we want to really understand ourselves and make progress.